---
title: "An Evaluation of the Potential Impact on China's Economy by Establishing the Beijing Stock Exchange"
date: 2021-12-01T23:15:00+07:00
slug: 
category: China's Economy
summary:
description: 
cover:
  image: "covers/BJStock.jpg"
  alt: 
  caption: 
  relative: true
showtoc: true
draft: false
---

# An Evaluation of the Potential Impact on China's Economy by Establishing the Beijing Stock Exchange

# I. Introduction
The year 2021 is being called the year of change, and China is undergoing a major change that has not been seen in a hundred years. First, China is seeking to transform its economy by limiting the Internet and real estate industries and vigorously promoting technological innovation. This is accompanied by the development of vocational education and the training of skilled personnel. In the 14th Five-Year Plan, China has placed the second part of the plan on promoting innovation and technology development, emphasizing "strengthening the national strategic science and technology force", "enhancing the technological innovation capacity of enterprises", and "stimulating the innovative energy of talents".  It also continues to emphasize the development of modern industries and the construction of the real economy in the third chapter. The establishment of the Beijing Stock Exchange is a major initiative to promote the development of science and technology and modernized industry empowerment. The paper will first introduce the history and current status of the Beijing Stock Exchange and compare it with the Growth Enterprise Market (GEM) and Science and Technology Innovation Board (STAR), which are also the subject of science and technology innovation, to illustrate the important role it plays in corporate financing. The paper will then discuss the significance of the Beijing Stock Exchange in addressing the financing difficulties of SMEs and analyze it in four aspects: its promotion of joint national economic development, breaking capital monopoly, driving professional talent development, and contributing to the sustainable development of China's economy.

# II. Timeline of establishing Beijing Stock Exchange
Of the first 81 stocks listed on the Beijing Stock Exchange, 10 were first-time IPOs, while 71 were from the New Third Board Select Tier. The Beijing Stock Exchange was reformed based on the New Third Board. The New Third Board is essentially a share transfer system, a platform for unlisted public companies to issue and publicly transfer shares .In January 2006, the share quotation and transfer system for unlisted companies limited by shares in Zhongguancun Science and Technology Park was officially launched. Located in Beijing, the Zhongguancun Science and Technology Park is home to many small and medium-sized high-tech companies and was once known as China's Silicon Valley. To support the development of technology, China piloted this share transfer system for small and medium enterprises in Zhongguancun and launched its nationwide implementation in May 2012. Finally, in January 2013, the National SME Stock Transfer System was officially inaugurated. However, this share transfer system is aimed at small and medium-sized enterprises, and the high uncertainty of the enterprises themselves leads to a higher risk of investment compared to investing in large companies. Therefore, considering the high risk, the New Third Board only allows institutional investors to invest and the threshold is set at 5 million RMB in financial assets. However, due to the lack of information transparency and the large differences in the management and development potential of many companies, the decision cost of investors is high, so the liquidity of the New Third Board is poor, and it has not been able to solve the problem of difficult financing for SMEs to a large extent. In order to further solve the financing dilemma of SMEs, China has launched a series of reform measures for the New Third Board and started to implement the management of innovative and basic tiers for listed companies since June 2016, aiming to screen and cultivate high-quality enterprises. However, these reform measures did not solve the core problem, and with the rapid growth of SMEs' financing needs, a total of 1,820 companies were delisted from January 1 to November 30, 2019, an increase of 31.98% from 1,379 in the same period of the previous year, and the number of New Third Board listed companies fell below 10,000, down to 9,111. From Figure 1 and Figure 2, we can also see that since 2017, the financing scale of the New Third Board in all years, the financing scale and turnover are on a downward trend, and fell significantly from 2017 to 2018, with the turnover scale falling from 227.18 billion yuan to 88.8 billion yuan. As a result, in October 2019, China announced that it began to deepen the reform of the New Third Board and opened the Select Tier of the New Third Board in July 2020. After the reform, the investor threshold for the basic tier was reduced to 2 million yuan, the investment threshold for the innovation tier was reduced to 1.5 million yuan, and for investors in the selective tier, public funds were introduced and an investor threshold of 1 million yuan was set. This initiative has attracted a large number of investors to the New Third Board, with the number of qualified investors increasing to over 1.7 million in July 2021, a 7.3-fold increase compared to the end of year 2019.
By establishing Beijing Stock Exchange, the entry requirement for trading was further loosen. Individual investors with 500 thousand yuan would be able to enter the stock market. 2.1 million investors reserved to trade in Beijing Stock Exchange, and the number of qualified investors was estimated to be more than 4 million. On December 15 2021, the first day of trading of Beijing Stock Exchange, the turnover was 9.576 billion yuan, which is more than 10 percent of the total turnover in 2019. During the first week, the total turnover was 21.249 billion yuan, and the 10 newly established stocks all exhibited significant rise in price, along with the reduce in price for most stocks moving from the select tiers. We could observe a high synchronicity in stock performance, which was possibly caused by people’s reaction to the government policy. The turnover in the second week decreased to 11.285 billion, which was still 49.2% higher than the turnover for the week before the opening of the Beijing Stock Exchange. Even though the stock performance was interfered by government policy, we could still see that people became more interested in investing in SMEs.

# III. Comparison between Beijing Stock Exchange and GEM and STAR
- III.1 Conditions of listing on the Beijing Stock Exchange (Market capitalization and financial indicators). (a) The expected market value is not less than 200 million yuan, the net profit of the last two years is not less than 15 million yuan and the weighted average return on net assets is not less than 8% on average, or the net profit of the last year is not less than 25 million yuan and the weighted average return on net assets is not less than 8%. (b) The expected market value is not less than 400 million yuan, the average operating income for the last two years is not less than 100 million yuan, and the growth rate of operating income for the latest year is not less than 30%, and the net cash flow from operating activities for the latest year is positive. (c) The expected market capitalization is not less than 800 million yuan, the operating income in the most recent year is not less than 200 million yuan, and the total investment in R&D in the most recent two years accounts for not less than 8% of the total operating income in the most recent two years. (d) The market capitalization is expected to be not less than RMB 1.5 billion, and the total investment in R&D in the last two years is not less than RMB 50 million. 
- III.2 Conditions of listing on the STAR (Market capitalization and financial indicators). (a) The expected market capitalization is not less than RMB 1 billion, with positive net profit for the last two years and cumulative net profit of not less than RMB 50 million, or the expected market capitalization is not less than RMB 1 billion, with positive net profit for the latest year and operating revenue of not less than RMB 100 million. (b) The market value is expected to be not less than RMB 1.5 billion, the operating revenue in the most recent year is not less than RMB 200 million, and the ratio of cumulative R&D investment in the most recent three years to cumulative operating revenue in the most recent three years is not less than 15%. (c) The market capitalization is expected to be not less than RMB 2 billion, the operating revenue in the most recent year is not less than RMB 300 million, and the cumulative net cash flow from operating activities in the last three years is not less than RMB 100 million. (d) The expected market capitalization is not less than RMB 3 billion, and the operating income in the most recent year is not less than RMB 300 million.(e) The expected market value is not less than RMB 4 billion, and the main business or product must be approved by the relevant state departments, with a large market space, and has achieved milestone results. Pharmaceutical industry companies need to have at least one core product approved for Phase II clinical trials, and other companies that meet the positioning of the science and technology board need to have obvious technical advantages and meet the corresponding conditions.
- III.3 Conditions of listing on the GEM (Market capitalization and financial indicators). (a) Positive net profit for the last two years, and cumulative net profit of not less than RMB 50 million. (b) The expected market capitalization is not less than RMB 1 billion, and the net profit of the most recent year is positive and the business income is not less than RMB 100 million. (c) The market capitalization is expected to be not less than RMB 5 billion and the operating income for the most recent year is not less than RMB 300 million.
- III.4 Comparison. Comparing the listing requirements of Beijing Stock Exchange, GEM and STAR, Beijing Stock Exchange has set four different sets of criteria to make differentiated arrangements for the listing standards of innovative enterprises. Firstly, considering the weak initial profitability of many SMEs enterprises, the listing index of the Beijing Stock Exchange has lower profitability requirements, and the net profit index is lower than the requirements of GEM and STAR. Secondly, the market capitalization requirements for listed companies have also been adjusted downward. What is more valuable is that the Beijing Stock Exchange assesses the innovation capability of SMEs in two dimensions, namely the cumulative R&D investment ratio and the absolute R&D investment amount, effectively facilitating the listing of SMEs with innovation potential. This shows that Beijing Stock Exchange is serving smaller and more innovative companies in science and technology. What is more convenient is that the listed companies on the Beijing Stock Exchange can apply for transfer to the GEM or STAR after meeting the listing requirements, which is a much simpler and faster process. According to this analysis, the Beijing Stock Exchange has improved the financing loophole for scientific and technological innovation (STI) SMEs in the initial stage, and has sought a smoother and more stable development path for STI SMEs.       

# IV. Evaluation of the impact of the Beijing Stock Exchange

- IV.1 Solve the financing problem for SMEs. By the end of 2018, the number of small and medium-sized enterprises in China had reached the number of 110 million, accounting for 99.6% of all market entities and producing more than 60% of GDP, 50% of tax revenue and 80% of jobs. More importantly, those SMEs generated more than 65% of the technology innovation. But for the vast majority of technology innovation companies, the capital to start a business is not a strong economic power, but unique technology. However, capital is essential for companies to grow. Due to the short time of creation and limited initial capital of SMEs, this prevents them from establishing good credit with banks, which also leads to the inability to get large loans from banks. In China, 58 percent of them are financially constrained, with the financing gap accounting for 17% of GDP. Obtaining loans is difficult for more than half of China's businesses, and SME’s are more restricted from receiving loans among China's financing limited corporations. The shortage of capital has slowed down the development of companies and prevented many technological innovations from being applied on a broader scale. Providing stable and reliable financing to outstanding SMEs will also lay a solid foundation for technological innovation. Beijing Stock Exchange offered a new channel for well behaved SMEs to finance from the public. This new source of financing will provide SMEs with additional capital and inject new vitality into the development of science and technology.
- IV.2 Driving professional talent development. According to the results of the seventh national census data in 2020, the rate of tertiary education level and above in China reached 15.467%, which is the result of compulsory education. However, it has also become an objective reality that the population of higher education overflows the rate of industrial structure upgrading. After the expansion of higher education institutions, the difficulty of employment of college graduates has become one of the biggest social problems, because China's technology-intensive high-end manufacturing and high-end service industries have not yet become bigger and stronger, and cannot provide enough jobs. On the other hand, there is a serious shortage of labor in labor-intensive industries in China, especially senior skilled workers with certain technical knowledge. Although China is vigorously developing vocational education and encouraging school-enterprise cooperation, the fundamental problem is that the employment prospect and salary of learning technology are not as good as the work involved in higher education. According to statistics, the average salary of private sector employees engaged in information transmission, software and information technology services can reach 101,281 yuan, the average salary of those engaged in the financial sector can reach 82,930 yuan, far ahead of the rest of the industry, where the highest salary of scientific research and technical services, but also reached 72,233 yuan. To really solve the talent gap problem, it is necessary to improve the treatment of employees. However, in order to improve the treatment of talents engaged in science and technology innovation, supporting small and medium-sized enterprises, which are the main force of science and technology innovation, is the first task. The establishment of the Beijing Stock Exchange provides a new platform for SME financing, which will greatly promote the development of SMEs. As SMEs become bigger and stronger, the treatment of STI practitioners will naturally be improved. This will also attract a large portion of young people to participate in vocational education, thus making China's talent structure more reasonable and healthy, and providing more talents for China's science and technology innovation. 
- IV.3 Support the nationwide economy growth. Since the reform and opening up, China's economic center of gravity has been in the south. At the beginning of the reform and opening up, many township and village enterprises (TVE) sprang up in China. The three well known regions models of TVE are Southern Jiangsu Model, Wenzhou Model, and Pearl River Delta Model. All of the three models were based in the south of China, and this fact led the foundation for capital accumulation in the south. In 1990, two stock exchanges were opened in China's interior. They were the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange, with the Main Board located in Shanghai to serve large corporations and the Small and Medium Board located in Shenzhen to serve small and medium-sized enterprises. These two stock exchanges were also located in the South, continuing to solidify the South's position as the center of economic and financial gravity. This historical development has led to significant economic differences between the North and the South, with Beijing being the only city in the top ten of the national GDP rankings for the first half of 2021. The significant southern-northern economic disparity will lead to a large loss of northern industries and talent. The establishment of the Beijing Stock Exchange will attract a large amount of capital back to the north and promote the economic development of the northern region.
- IV.4 Support a sustainable economy development. In recent years, investment has become an important factor contributing to China's GDP growth. However, most of China's investment has been in the real estate sector. China's GDP growth is dependent on land sales, bank loans, and excess real estate development. Data show that in 2016, property accounted for 66% of the total assets of Chinese residents. Such a high percentage of property investment has led to a real estate bubble. More importantly, however, the development of real estate is unsustainable, as demand for property is limited and land is finite. To further increase GDP per capita, China must transition from investment-driven GDP growth to technology and innovation-driven GDP growth. With the “Houses are for living, not for investing” initiative, the three red lines, and many other controls on the real estate sector such as purchase restrictions, China needs to find a new flow of capital. The establishment of the Beijing Stock Exchange provides an entry point for capital to flow into the technology and innovation sector. The stock market + companies + technology innovation is an excellent positive feedback loop. With capital support, new technologies will develop faster, and as technology develops, China will be able to create more value. As capital continues to be injected into the STI sector, China's GDP per capita will steadily rise and is expected to step out of the middle-income trap and enter the ranks of high-income countries. 
- IV.5 Antitrust. It has always been difficult for ordinary investors to participate in the pre-financing of quality startups. The dividends of pre-financing for quality startups are monopolized by many capitals, which is not beneficial to the startups themselves and investors. The Beijing Stock Exchange provides an opportunity for investors to participate in investing in fast-growing small and medium-sized companies, and also lays the foundation for a healthier share structure for small and medium-sized companies. In addition, many small and medium sized technology innovators are subject to hostile competition and takeover by large monopolies due to lack of capital. Providing a financing platform for SMEs will also solve this problem.
# V. Conclusion
In the context of promoting science and technology innovation, the establishment of the Beijing Stock Exchange will support the development of science and technology innovation SMEs to the maximum extent. Through the analysis of the entry conditions, we find that the Beijing Stock Exchange serves as a pre-preparation for SMEs to enter the Science and Technology Innovation Board and the Growth Enterprise Market. And through the analysis of the policies, we find that the establishment of the Beijing Stock Exchange will have a positive impact on the Chinese economy in five aspects: solving the financing difficulties of SMEs, promoting the rationalization of the talent structure, helping the sustainable development of the Chinese economy, promoting the common development of the national economy, and breaking the monopoly of capital.

# VII. References
Fan, Pei. (2021, Jan 7). “Analysis of SME financing under the reform measures of the New Third Board.” China Business & Trade. https://kns.cnki.net/kcms/detail/detail.aspx?doi=10.19699/j.cnki.issn2096-0298.2021.01.077.

Hongbo, Pan. Tao, Wang. Ying, Zhou. (2020, Sep) “New OTC market stratified system, market environment and earnings management.” Journal of Central South University (Social Science). http://www.zndxsk.com.cn/Article_View_temp.asp?type=4634&ID=4634.

Government of the People's Republic of China. (2021, March 13). “Outline of the Fourteenth Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development of the People's Republic of China and the Vision 2035.” http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2021-03/13/content_5592681.htm.

Beijing Stock Exchange. (2021, November 15). Business Rules. http://www.bse.cn/business/overview.html.

Shanghai Stock Exchange. (2020, December 14). Shanghai Stock Exchange Rules for the Review of Stock Issuance and Listing on the Science and Technology Board. http://www.sse.com.cn/lawandrules/sselawsrules/stock/star/review/c/c_20210128_5311848.shtml.

Shenzhen Stock Exchange. (2020). Shenzhen Stock Exchange issue listing conditions. http://www.szse.cn/ipo/guide/requirements/index.html.

National Bureau of Statistics. (2020). Key data from the seventh national census in 2020. http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/pcsj/rkpc/d7c/202111/P020211126523667366751.pdf.

National Bureau of Statistics. (2021). China Statistical Yearbook. http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/ndsj/2021/indexch.htm.